Archives station Archives is a Washington Metro station in Washington , D.C . on the Green and Yellow Lines . The station is located in Northwest Washington at 7th Street between Pennsylvania and Indiana Avenues , and it is very close to Gallery Place station , so close that the lights of one station can be seen down the tunnel from the other . It takes its name from the nearby National Archives . Its subtitle is derived from the U.S . Navy Memorial and the Penn Quarter neighborhood in which the station is located . It is a popular stop for tourists , with easy access to the northern side of the National Mall . History . Service began on April 30 , 1983 . Its opening coincided with the completion of of rail south of Gallery Place to LEnfant Plaza and across a bridge over the Potomac River to the Pentagon station . The station was originally named Archives–Navy Memorial . In 2004 , it was renamed Archives–Navy Memorial–Penn Quarter , in recognition of the nearby Penn Quarter neighborhood . Navy Memorial and Penn Quarter were moved to a new subtitle , leaving Archives as the main name , on November 3 , 2011 . New signage was installed accordingly in 2005 , following the 2004 renaming , and in late-spring 2012 , following the late-2011 second renaming . There is a provision for a future second mezzanine at the south end of the station , with a knock-out panel visible on the stations south wall . From March 26 , 2020 until June 28 , 2020 , this station was closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic . Between January 15 to January 21 , 2021 , this station was closed because of security concerns due to the 2020 Inauguration . Station layout . The station has an island platform accessed from the corner of Indiana Avenue and Seventh Street , NW . Notable places nearby . - Department of Justice - Embassy of Canada , Washington , D.C . - Federal Trade Commission - Fords Theatre - Grand Army of the Republic Memorial - J . Edgar Hoover Building ( headquarters of the FBI ) - National Archives - National Gallery of Art - National Mall - National Museum of Natural History - Newseum - Temperance Fountain In popular culture . In 2004 , the station was referenced in the Disney film National Treasure . The station entrance was also featured in the 2007 film Breach . External links . - The Schumin Web Transit Center : Archives Station - Pennsylvania Avenue entrance from Google Maps Street View
