Frederica Wilson Frederica Smith Wilson ( born Frederica Patricia Smith , November 5 , 1942 ) is a politician who has been a member of the United States House of Representatives since 2011 , representing . Located in South Florida , Wilsons congressional district , numbered as the 17th during her first term , covers a large swath of eastern Miami-Dade County and a sliver of southern Broward County . Included within the district are most of the majority-black precincts of Miami , as well as portions of Opa-locka , North Miami , Hollywood , and Miramar . She gained national attention in early 2012 as a result of her high-profile comments on the death of Trayvon Martin . Wilson is a member of the Democratic Party . The seat to which she was elected became available when the incumbent Kendrick Meek ran for a seat in the Senate in 2010 . Wilson is known for her large and colorful hats , of which she owns several hundred . She has gone through efforts to get Congress to lift its ban on head coverings during House sessions . That rule dates back to 1837 , 80 years before the first woman took her seat in Congress . Early life , education , and early career . Wilson was born Frederica Smith on November 5 , 1942 , in Miami , Florida , the daughter of Beulah ( née Finley ) and Thirlee Smith . Her maternal grandparents were Bahamian . Wilson earned her bachelor of arts degree from Fisk University in 1963 and her master of arts degree from the University of Miami in 1972 , both in elementary education . She served as the principal of Skyway Elementary School in Miami . In 1992 she left her position as principal to serve on the Miami-Dade County School Board . While a member of the school board , Wilson started 5,000 Role Models of Excellence , an in-school mentoring program . Florida legislature . Wilson represented the 104th district in the Florida House of Representatives from 1998 to 2002 . She then represented the 33rd district in the Florida Senate from 2002 until her election to Congress in 2010 when term limits prevented her from running again . She served as Minority Leader Pro Tempore in 2006 , then Minority Whip . An early supporter of Barack Obamas 2008 presidential campaign , she voted for Obama and Joe Biden in 2008 as one of Floridas presidential electors . U.S . House of Representatives . 2010 election . When Kendrick Meek retired from Floridas 17th congressional district to run for the United States Senate in 2010 , Wilson ran for the open seat and won the Democratic nomination to take it . She won the general election on November 2 , 2010 , without electoral opposition in a district where the Democratic nomination is tantamount to election . She is a member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus . Committee assignments . - Committee on Foreign Affairs - Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific - Committee on Science , Space and Technology - Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics - Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation Caucus memberships . - Congressional Black Caucus - Congressional Arts Caucus - Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus - Congressional Progressive Caucus - Medicare for All Caucus Tenure . - Education During her career as an educator , she founded the 5000 Role Models program , which seeks to bring down dropout rates . Since her time in the Florida legislature , she has strongly opposed standardized testing . She has expressed concern with the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test ( FCAT ) , suggesting that the funds spent administering the standardized test would be better spent on improving education by hiring more teachers , and proposing in 2012 that tutoring companies be banned from exploiting vulnerable children , even if it means banning companies like Ignite ! Learning , founded by ex-Governor Jeb Bushs brother , Neil . - Tea Party Frederica Wilson has taken a vocal opposition to the Tea Party . At a Miami town hall meeting in 2011 , she told citizens to remember that the Tea Party is the real enemy and that they hold Congress hostage . She expressed her belief that they had one goal in mind : to make President Obama a one-term president . - Trayvon Martin case Wilson took a vocal stance in the death of Trayvon Martin , who was a constituent of hers and whose family she says she has known all her life . She has been both praised and criticized for stating shortly after the killing the motive of the accused , George Zimmerman , was racism . She suggested in March 2012 that Zimmerman had hunted Martin , based simply on his race . She said , Mr . Zimmerman should be arrested immediately for his own safety . - Anti-hazing Wilson led efforts to combat bullying and hazing both as the South Atlantic Regional Director for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority and as a member of Congress . A Miami Herald reporter nicknamed her The Haze Buster for her public stance against hazing . She was part of a coalition of African-American fraternity and sorority leaders who launched an anti-hazing campaign after the 2011 death of Florida A&M drum major Robert Champion Jr . - Recognition MSNBCs The Grio , an African-American news and opinion platform , named Wilson to The Grio 100 for 2012 . - Shooting of Charles Kinsey After the release of the video showing police shooting mental health therapist Charles Kinsey in her district , Wilson tweeted in July 2016 that she was shocked and angered by Kinseys shooting . She added that Like everyone else I have one question : Why ? - Death of La David Johnson Following the death of Sergeant La David Johnson on October 4 , 2017 , in an attack in Niger , Wilson told the press that on October 16 , 2017 , President Donald Trump had called Johnsons widow while she was on the way to Miami International Airport for the arrival of Johnsons remains . In the car with her were Johnsons mother and other family members , as well as Wilson , a long-time friend of the family . The widow put the call on speakerphone so that Wilson and others in the car heard it . Wilson stated Trump was almost like joking and that he said he [ Johnson ] knew what he signed up for , but I guess it still hurt . Donald Trump later called Wilsons characterization of the conversation a fabrication . Johnsons mother confirmed Wilsons account on October 18 , at which point the White House ceased disputing Wilsons account of the phone call and instead claimed that she was mischaracterizing the spirit of the conversation . On October 23 , Johnsons widow also confirmed Wilsons account . On October 19 , 2017 , White House Chief of Staff John F . Kelly gave a press briefing at the White House . Kelly , who is a gold star parent and was present at Trumps end during the phone conversation , did not deny that Trump said the words reported . But he defended Trumps comments forcefully and emotionally , saying that Trump in his way tried to express that opinion that he’s a brave man , a fallen hero . He also attacked Wilson for having listened to the phone call and claimed that she had a history of politicizing what should be sacred moments , citing the 2015 dedication of an FBI field office in Miami as an example . He claimed that her speech at that ceremony was about how she was instrumental in getting the funding for that building from then-President Barack Obama . The details of Kellys statement were disproven by the video recording of the event . During her nine-minute speech , Wilson spoke for less than three minutes about leading an effort to expedite a bill through Congress . The bills purpose was naming the FBI building after two FBI agents slain in the line of duty ; the bill would normally not have become law in time for the buildings dedication ceremony . Wilson dedicated the remainder of her speech to acknowledging other politicians involved in the effort , thanking FBI personnel , and talking about the slain agents . The FBI secured the buildings funding in 2009 , before Wilson became a congresswoman in 2011 . The Miami Herald reported that Kelly had misquoted the cost of the building as $20 million versus the actual $194 million . As a result , several newspapers have called for Kelly to apologize to Wilson . The White House said the video did not capture all of Wilsons comments . - Impeachment of Donald Trump On December 18 , 2019 , Wison voted to impeach President Donald J . Trump . Personal life . Wilson married Paul Wilson in 1963 and was widowed when he died in 1988 . She has three children . She is an Episcopalian . Wilson is an avid wearer of hats . She has a large collection that includes hundreds of hats of all different varieties . She is known to wear one every day . During the tenure of former House Speaker John Boehner , she unsuccessfully asked him to waive the United States House of Representatives ban on head covering rule . The rule was partially relaxed after the election of two Muslim women to congress in 2018 . One , Ilhan Omar ( D-MN ) , wore a hijab to her swearing in on January 3 , 2019 . Electoral history .
