Gastone Mojaisky Perrelli Gastone Mojaisky Perrelli ( born Gastone Mojaisky , 6 August 1914 – 5 March 2008 ) was an Italian Catholic archbishop . He served as Apostolic Delegate to the Congo and Ruanda-Urundi and then to British East Africa and British West Africa , during which time he held the Titular Archbishopric of Amida . He later served as Archbishop-Bishop of Nusco and as Archbishop of Conza-SantAngelo dei Lombardi-Bisaccia . Biography . Formation . Gastone Mojaisky was born on 6 August 1937 in Buonalbergo , a comune in the province of Benevento and the Italian region of Campania . He was born to the noble family of a Russian ambassador who was at the service of the tsar . He was the son of Alceste Perrelli of the noble family of Buonalbergo ( after which the city was named ) and Carlo , a lawyer and municipal secretary whose family had taken refuge in Buonalbergo for political reasons and established kinship with the illustrious families of the area , including the Perrelli , Mogavero , Cosentini , and DAmore families , the latter two originally being from Benevento and San Marco dei Cavoti . In Buonalbergo , Mojaisky Perrelli was raised in the Christian religion by his family , who turned to the Catholic Church after the untimely death of Alceste Perrelli and the unexpected devotion of Anna Mojaisky , Gastones sister , who , in memory of her mother , professed her religious vows and took the name Sister Alceste before dying at a young age in 1934 . Mojaisky Perrelli was raised by his stepmother Donna Emilia DAmore . After finishing his studies in Naples at G.B . Vico high school , he decided to enter the priesthood . He entered the Pontifical Seminary of Benevento and received his cassock as a seminarian on 14 November 1932 from Archbishop Adeodato Giovanni Piazza . In 1937 , at the Church of San Nicola di Bari in Buonalbergo , Mojaisky Perrelli was ordained a priest by Archbishop Orazio Mazzella . He later graduated from the Pontifical Lateran University , where he studied canon law , and from the Sapienza University of Rome , where he studied classical letters . He then added to his surname that of his mother , Perrelli . Diplomatic career . During his schooling and university education , he became fluent in five languages , which enabled him to be sent to Bolivia in 1942 as secretary of the Apostolic Nunciature to Bolivia . While there , he was appointed the chargé daffaires ad interim in 1945 . In 1946 , he was sent to Santiago de Chile , then moved to Switzerland three years later as an auditor of the Apostolic Nunciature to Switzerland in Bern . In 1951 , he was sent as an advisor to the Nunciature in Mexico . While rector of the Apostolic Nunciatures in Cuba and in Guatemala , he was sent by Pope Pius XII to Mombasa in 1957 as Apostolic Delegate to British East Africa and British West Africa , an assignment he later held in Léopoldville . He was given in addition the position of Apostolic Delegate to the Congo and Ruanda-Urundi on 8 August 1959 . Episcopal ministry . Mojaisky Perrelli was appointed Titular Archbishop of Amida on 8 August 1959 and was ordained a bishop on 1 November of that year by Cardinal Domenico Tardini and co-consecrators Archbishop Pietro Sigismondi and Bishop Vittorio Longo . He was a Council Father in all four periods of the Second Vatican Council from 1962 to 1965 . Mojaisky Perrelli was appointed Archbishop-Bishop of Nusco on 10 May 1963 ( archbishop being granted to him as a personal title ) . He was appointed Archbishop of Conza-SantAngelo dei Lombardi-Bisaccia on 4 August 1973 , both of which he held simultaneously until 1978 . In these roles , he distinguished himself for his noble , strong-willed , austere , and upright character . On 18 November 1978 , after a heated conflict with the local clergy , he resigned his pastoral offices and lived near the shrine of the Most Holy Savior in Montella in near-hermitage . In the mid-1980s , he moved to Naples , where he lived in retirement and holding the title of Archbishop Emeritus of Nusco , in a community of Vincentian priests in Via Vergini . There , he died at dawn on 5 March 2008 . Following the solemn funeral Mass celebrated by Archbishop Andrea Mugione on 7 March in SantAngelo dei Lombardi , he was buried in the family tomb in Buonalbergo . During his life , he was appointed a Knight of the Grand Cross of the Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George .
