Margaret Burbidge Eleanor Margaret Burbidge , FRS ( née Peachey ; 12 August 1919 – 5 April 2020 ) was a British-American observational astronomer and astrophysicist . In the 1950s , she was one of the founders of stellar nucleosynthesis and was first author of the influential BFH paper . During the 1960s and 70s she worked on galaxy rotation curves and quasars , discovering the most distant astronomical object then known . In the 1980s and 90s she helped develop and utilise the Faint Object Spectrograph on the Hubble Space Telescope . Burbidge was well known for her work opposing discrimination against women in astronomy . Burbidge held several leadership and administrative posts , including Director of the Royal Greenwich Observatory ( 1973–75 ) , President of the American Astronomical Society ( 1976–78 ) , and President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science ( 1983 ) . Burbidge worked at the University of London Observatory , Yerkes Observatory of the University of Chicago , the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge , the California Institute of Technology , and the University of California San Diego ( UCSD ) . From 1979 to 1988 she was the first director of the Center for Astronomy and Space Sciences at UCSD , where she worked from 1962 until her retirement . Research career . Burbidge studied at University College London ( UCL ) , where she received an undergraduate degree in 1939 and a PhD in 1943 . During World War II , she acted as a caretaker at University of London Observatory ( ULO ) ; the wartime blackout made it easier for her to use the observatorys telescopes . In August 1944 , her observations at ULO were twice interrupted by V-1 flying bomb explosions nearby . She was turned down for a postdoctoral fellowship from Carnegie Observatories in 1945 because the job required observing at Mount Wilson Observatory , which was reserved for men only at that time . Shortly after the war , she taught astronomy at ULO to undergraduate students from across the University of London system , including Arthur C . Clarke who was then an undergraduate at Kings College London . In 1951 she took a position at the University of Chicagos Yerkes Observatory , Wisconsin , her first job in the United States . Her research during this period focused on the abundances of chemical elements in stars . She returned to the UK in 1953 , when Margaret and her husband Geoffrey Burbidge were invited to work with William Alfred Fowler and Fred Hoyle at the University of Cambridge . The team combined data on elemental abundances produced by the Burbidges with Hoyles hypothesis that all chemical elements might be produced in stars by a series of nuclear reactions , and Fowlers laboratory experiments on those reactions . The idea became known as stellar nucleosynthesis . They published their model in a series of papers , culminating in a magnum opus in 1957 , now known as the BFH paper after the initials of Burbidge , Burbidge , Fowler & Hoyle . Margaret Burbidge was the first author of the paper , which was written while she was pregnant . The paper demonstrated that most heavier chemical elements were formed in stellar evolution . The theory they developed remains the fundamental basis for stellar nucleosynthesis . Fowler was later awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physics ( shared with Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar ) for his work on nucleosynthesis , and expressed surprise that Burbidge was not included . When Fowler moved back to the US , he advised the Burbidges to come with him to California , suggesting Margaret ( the observer ) should re-apply for the fellowship at Mount Wilson Observatory while Geoff ( the theorist ) should seek the Kellogg Fellowship at Caltech . Margarets application was again refused on gender grounds , so the couple swapped applications . Geoff won the position at Mount Wilson , while Margaret took the Caltech job in 1955 . Whenever Geoff was required to go observing on Mount Wilson , Margaret would accompany him , ostensibly as his assistant . In reality , Geoff worked in the photographic dark room while Margaret operated the telescope . When the observatorys management found out , they eventually agreed that she could observe there , but only if she and her husband stayed in a separate self-catered cottage on the grounds , rather than the catered dormitory which had been designed for men only . She joined the University of California San Diego ( UCSD ) in 1962 . In the 1960s and 1970s she measured the masses , compositions , and rotation curves of galaxies and performed early spectroscopic studies of quasars . Her discoveries in this area included QSO B1442+101 at a redshift of 3.5 , making it the most distant known object at the time , a record which she held from 1974–82 . She was a supporter of the steady state theory of cosmology , but her own work on quasars helped to support the alternative Big Bang theory . In 1972 Burbidge became director of the Royal Greenwich Observatory ( RGO ) , on secondment from UCSD . For 300 years the post had always been held by the Astronomer Royal , but when Burbidge was appointed to the RGO directorship the posts were split , with radio astronomer Martin Ryle appointed as Astronomer Royal . Burbidge sometimes attributed this to sexism , and at other times to politics intended to reduce the clout of the RGO director . Burbidge left the RGO in 1974 , fifteen months after joining , due to controversy over moving the Isaac Newton Telescope from RGO headquarters at Herstmonceux Castle to Roque de los Muchachos Observatory in the Canary Islands . Burbidge campaigned in opposition to discrimination against women in astronomy and was also opposed to positive discrimination . In 1972 she turned down the Annie J . Cannon Award of the American Astronomical Society ( AAS ) because it was awarded to women only : It is high time that discrimination in favor of , as well as against , women in professional life be removed . Her letter declining the prize caused the AAS to set up its first committee on the status of women in astronomy . In 1976 , she became the first female president of the AAS . During her term as president she convinced the members to ban AAS meetings in states which had not ratified the Equal Rights Amendment to the US Constitution . In 1984 the AAS awarded her its highest honor , regardless of gender , the Henry Norris Russell Lectureship . From 1979 to 1988 , she served as the first director of the UCSDs Center for Astrophysics and Space Science . In 1981 she was elected President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science ( AAAS ) , serving her one-year term from February 1982 to February 1983 . At UCSD she helped develop the Faint Object Spectrograph for the Hubble Space Telescope , which launched in 1990 . With this instrument , she and her team discovered that the galaxy Messier 82 contains a supermassive black hole at its center . As professor emerita at UCSD she continued to be active in research until the early 21st century . Burbidge authored over 370 research papers . Personal life . Eleanor Margaret Peachey was born in Davenport , Stockport , UK , nine months after the Armistice of 11 November 1918 that ended the First World War . She was the daughter of Marjorie Stott Peachey and Stanley John Peachey . She first became interested in astronomy aged 3 or 4 , after seeing the stars on a ferry trip across the English Channel . By age 12 , she was reading astronomy textbooks by James Jeans , a distant relative of her mother . On 2 April 1948 , Margaret Peachey married Geoffrey Burbidge . The couple had met six months earlier at University College London . Geoffrey was a theoretical physicist , but Margarets passion for astronomy convinced him to switch to theoretical astrophysics . The two collaborated on much of their subsequent research . The couple had a daughter , Sarah , who was born in late 1956 . In 1977 , Margaret became a United States citizen . Geoffrey Burbidge died in 2010 . Margaret Burbidge died on 5 April 2020 , in San Francisco at the age of 100 after suffering a fall . Honors . Awards . - Helen B . Warner Prize for Astronomy , 1959 , awarded jointly with Geoffrey Burbidge , for the BFH paper - Fellow of the Royal Society , 1964 - Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences ( 1969 ) - President , American Astronomical Society ( 1976-1978 ) - Karl G . Jansky Lecturer , National Radio Astronomy Observatory ( 1977 ) - Member of the National Academy of Sciences ( 1978 ) - Catherine Wolfe Bruce medal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific ( 1982 ) - National Medal of Science ( 1983 ) - President , American Association for the Advancement of Science ( 1983 ) - Henry Norris Russell Lectureship ( 1984 ) - Association pour le Développement International de lObservatoire de Nice ( ADION ) medal ( 1987 ) - Albert Einstein World Award of Science ( 1988 ) - Inducted into the Womens Museum of California Hall of Fame ( 2003 ) - Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society , with Geoffrey Burbidge ( 2005 ) - Elected Inaugural Fellow of the American Astronomical Society in 2020 Named after her . - Asteroid 5490 Burbidge - Margaret Burbidge Award of the American Physical Society
