Oscar Seborer Oscar Seborer ( June 4 , 1921 – April 23 , 2015 ) , codenamed Godsend , was an atomic spy for the Soviet Union who worked at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , and the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico . Early life . Oscar Seborer was born in New York City on June 4 , 1921 , youngest child of Jewish Polish immigrants Abraham Seborer , a clerk , and Jennie ( Scheine ) Chanover . He had four older siblings : three brothers , Max , Noah and Stuart , and a sister , Rose . Abraham and Jennie lived in Palestine from 1934 to 1938 , and Oscar apparently lived there with them . All five children had some contact with the Communist Party USA ( CPUSA ) . Maxs first wife Rita Beigel was the sister of Rose Beigel Arenal , the second wife of Leopoldo Arenal , the brother of artist Luis Arenal Bastar . Leopoldo and Luis were involved in a plot to kill Leon Trotsky . Rose Beigel Arenal forwarded mail from Leopoldo to Elizabeth Bentley . After Roses death , Max married Celia Posen , who had served as a nurse with the Abraham Lincoln Battalion during the Spanish Civil War , and was friends with Harry Magdoff , Irving Kaplan and Stanley Graze . Max never joined the CPUSA , but his brother Noah did . Noah was close to Frederick Vanderbilt Field , Maurice Halperin and Albert Maltz , a screenwriter who later became one of the blacklisted Hollywood Ten . Oscars sister Rose worked for the CPUSA in New York in administrative positions . Neither Oscar nor Stuart joined the CPUSA . Stuart attended City College of New York ( CCNY ) with Julius Rosenberg and William Perl . In 1941 , Stuart joined the Treasury Department , where he worked under William Ullman , Frank Coe and Harry Dexter White . During World War II , Stuart served in the Army in Europe , earning the Silver Star . His wife Miriam Zeitlin served with the WAVES in the Bureau of Ships . During a routine Hatch Act of 1939 investigation in 1942 , she denied having any involvement with the CPUSA . Oscar also attended CCNY but then enrolled at Ohio State University , where he studied electrical engineering . Manhattan Project . Oscar was drafted into the Army in 1942 , but due to his special training he was assigned to the Special Engineer Detachment ( SED ) , a program that identified enlisted personnel with special technical or scientific skills , and put them to work on the Manhattan Project , the effort to build an atomic bomb . He was assigned to the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , and then to the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico . He was present at the Trinity nuclear test on July 16 , 1945 , with a group measuring the seismological effect of the explosion . Post-war . Stuart was discharged from the Army in 1946 , but continued to work for it in a civilian capacity with the Civil Affairs Division in Europe . He wrote a report on economic progress in Bizone , Germany in 1949 , and one on the Armys education program the following year . Stuarts wife Miriam graduated from George Washington University Medical School that year , but when he applied for a job at the State Department , he was told that he would not be granted the necessary security clearance . Oscar applied for a civilian position at Los Alamos in 1947 , but withdrew his application . Instead , he went to the University of Michigan , where he completed his masters degree in electrical engineering . After he graduated in August 1948 , he took a job at the US Navys Underwater Sound Laboratory in New London , Connecticut , where research on sonar for submarines was conducted . In August 1949 , the commanding officer recommended his termination as a security risk , but on August 29 a review board overturned this decision . He was transferred to the Electronic Shore Division of the Bureau of Ships , where he was involved in the installation of electronic equipment in American and European harbors . The equipment itself was not secret , but the location of devices was . He was the only man working in the unit who did not hold a security clearance . On 1 June 1951 he tendered his resignation . Emigration . On 3 July 1951 , Stuart , Oscar , Miriam and Miriams mother Anna boarded the liner bound for Le Havre . They then flew to Israel , where they visited Abraham and Jennie , who had re-emigrated in August 1950 and were living in Gan Yavne . They went to Vienna , and then to Moscow . Stuart and Oscar were employed there by the Soviet Academy of Sciences . Miriam and Stuart divorced in September 1961 , and she returned to the United States in December 1969 . She later worked as a medical technician at the United Nations until 1974 . She died in 2002 . Stuart and Oscar married Russian women . They became friends with Donald MacLean , who worked with them . Stuart published a couple of books on US Neocolonialism in Africa ( 1974 ) , which was translated into English , and Weaponry and Dollars : The Wellsprings of U.S . Foreign Policy ( 1987 ) , which was published only in Russian . Discovery . American codebreakers working on Venona found that the Manhattan Project had been penetrated by Soviet spies , which gave it the codename Enormous . They found references to codenames for three Soviet atomic spies working at Los Alamos : MLad , who turned out to be Theodore Hall ; Caliber , who was David Greenglass ; and Godsend , who was ultimately identified as Oscar Seborer . Since Klaus Fuchs was also known to be a Soviet spy , there were at least four Soviet agents at Los Alamos . Death . Oscar Seborer died in Moscow on April 23 , 2015 . Mourners included his brother Stuart and a representative from the Russian Federal Security Service .
