Philip Alston Philip G . Alston is an Australian international law scholar and human rights practitioner . He is John Norton Pomeroy Professor of Law at New York University School of Law , and co-Chair of the law schools Center for Human Rights and Global Justice . In human rights law , Alston has held a range of senior UN appointments for over two decades , including United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial , summary or arbitrary executions , a position he held from August 2004 to July 2010 . In 2014 he was appointed to an unpaid role as UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights . Background . Alston graduated from the University of Melbourne with an LL.B. ( Hons. ) in 1972 and an LL.M . in 1976 and from the University of California at Berkeley School of Law . His brother is the former Australian federal Cabinet minister and High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , Richard Alston . Career . Alstons first academic appointments were at Tufts University ( 1985–89 ) and Harvard Law School ( 1984–89 ) . Alston was then Professor at the Australian National University ( 1990–95 ) , and also director of its Center for International and Public Law . He was then Professor at the European University Institute ( 1996–2001 ) , before moving to New York University School of Law , where he is the John Norton Pomeroy Professor of Law and co-Chair of the law schools Center for Human Rights and Global Justice . He became a faculty instructor in the NYU Law Institute for Executive Education , which was launched in 2015 . United Nations . In human rights law , Alston has held a range of senior UN appointments for over two decades . From 1987 to 1991 he was the first Rapporteur for the UN Committee on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights ; he then chaired the committee from 1991 to 1998 . At the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights he was elected to chair the first meeting of the presidents and Chairs of all of the international human rights courts and committees ( including the European Court of Human Rights , the Inter-American Human Rights Court , the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights , and the UN Human Rights Committee ) . He was appointed by the United Nations Secretary-General in 1988 to suggest reforms to make the United Nations human rights treaty monitoring system more effective . His major reports in 1989 , 1993 , and 1997 provided the impetus for continuing efforts by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the UN Human Rights Council to streamline and improve the rather unwieldy monitoring system . His other United Nations appointments include Special Adviser to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights on the Millennium Development Goals . He was appointed to that post by Sergio Vieira de Mello , and has continued to advise successor High Commissioners , including Louise Arbour and Navanethem Pillay . UNICEF . He has been involved in the field of childrens rights and the legal adviser to UNICEF throughout the period of the drafting of the U.N . Convention on the Rights of the Child . He participated in the UNICEF delegation to the drafting sessions of the convention and continued to advise UNICEF for several years after the conventions adoption in 1989 , especially in relation to promoting the ratification of the convention by countries around the world . He published two studies for UNICEF on childrens rights . The first was The Best Interests of the Child : Reconciling Culture and Human Rights ( 1994 ) , and the second , with John Tobin , was Laying the Foundations for Childrens Rights , published in 2005 by UNICEF . Special Rapporteur . - On extrajudicial , summary or arbitrary executions From August 2004 – July 2010 he was the United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial , summary or arbitrary executions . In that capacity he reported to the UN Human Rights Council and the General Assembly . As Special Rapporteur , Alston visited Nigeria , Sri Lanka , the Philippines , Guatemala , Lebanon , Israel , The Central African Republic , Brazil , Afghanistan , the USA , Kenya , Ecuador , and Colombia , and issued a report in each case to the relevant government and to the United Nations . - On extreme poverty and human rights In 2014 , Alston was appointed UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights . In 1998 , the OHCHR established the mandate on extreme poverty . In June 2006 the Human Rights Council took over its mandate . Its goals include providing greater prominence to the plight of those living in extreme poverty and to highlight the human rights consequences of the systematic neglect to which they are all too often subjected . Other . Alston also directed a project funded by the European Commission , which resulted in the publication of a Human Rights Agenda for the European Union for the Year 2000 and a 1999 volume of essays ( The European Union and Human Rights ) . Many of its recommendations were subsequently implemented by the European Commission and the European Council . He also is one of 29 signatories to the Yogyakarta Principles . Publications . Alston has written on issues such as economic , social and cultural rights , United Nations institutions and procedures , labour rights , the role of non-state actors in relation to human rights , comparative bills of rights , the use of force , and human rights and development policies . He is also one of the authors of a textbook in the field entitled International Human Rights in Context , Law , Politics , Morals , published by Oxford University Press . A third edition was published in 2007 . In a 2017 article in the Journal of Human Rights Practice , faced with the rise of populism , Alston called for a reframing of economic and social rights as human rights rather than as welfare or development objectives . He also called on academics , those who are anti- and pro- human rights , to pay attention to the unintended consequences of their scholarship . External links . - Philip Alston : Record AfPak Drone Attacks Under Obama May Violate International Law – video report by Democracy Now ! - Project on Extrajudicial Executions , Center for Human Rights and Global Justice , New York University School of Law - NYU Law launches Institute for Executive Education , NYU Law Institute for Executive Education , New York University School of Law - Q&A : U.N.s poverty and human rights special rapporteur finds U.S . policies reward wealthy , punish poor . Interview in the Los Angeles Times , June 2 , 2018 .
