Tina Anselmi Tina Anselmi Cavaliere di Gran Croce OMRI ( 25 March 1927 – 1 November 2016 ) was a member of the Italian resistance movement during World War II who went on to become an Italian politician . She was the first woman to hold a ministerial position in an Italian government . Early life . Anselmi was born in Castelfranco Veneto , Treviso . Her father was an assistant pharmacist persecuted by the fascists because he was socialist , and her mother and grandmother ran an inn together . She attended the local high school , and then the Teaching Institute in Bassano del Grappa . On 26 September 1944 , Nazi soldiers forced her and a group of other students to witness the hanging of a group of 31 young Partisans . As a result , she joined the Italian Resistance movement and became part of the Cesare Battisti brigade . That year , she also joined the Christian Democracy Party . After World War II , she studied literature at the Catholic University of Milan and became a primary school teacher . Political career . While working as a teacher , Anselmi held positions in Christian trade unions , including the primary teachers union from 1948-55 . In 1959 , she joined the national council of the Christian Democracy Party , and she was the partys deputy leader from 1968-92 . In 1963 , she was elected vice-president of the Female Board of the European Union . From 1958-64 , she was head of the Christian Democracy partys youth programmes . From 1968 to 1987 , she was a Member of the Italian Chamber of Deputies , re-elected five times in the Venice-Treviso district . She served three times as undersecretary to the Department of Labour and Social Services , and in 1976 she became the first woman to be a member of an Italian cabinet , being chosen by Giulio Andreotti as Minister for Labour and Social Security . She held this position from 1976-79 . She served as Minister for Health from 1978 to 1979 . Anselmi is best known for having been the main proposer of Italian laws on equal opportunities , a matter she always fought for in her political life . For example in 1977 , she passed a bill which recognized fathers as primary caregivers for their children , and allowed for both fathers and mothers to have time away from their children . In the same year , a major piece of legislation was passed on gender parity in employment conditions , of which Anselmi was a key supporter . She chaired the National Equal Opportunities Commission until 1994 , and played a significant role in the introduction of Italys National Health Service . In 1981 , she headed the Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into the illegal P2 Masonic Lodge ( Commissione parlamentare d’inchiesta sulla Loggia massonica P2 ) ; the lodge , at the time , was considered a threat to society . Anselmi wrote the commissions final majority report that was approved in 1984 , and all activity of the lodge ceased the following year . Anselmi was the chair of a commission of inquiry into the work of Italian soldiers in Somalia , and of a national commission on the consequences of laws for the Italian Jewish community . She was an honorary vice president of the National Institute for the History of the Liberation Movement in Italy . Later in her life , she began to write about her experiences in the Resistance ; in 2003 , she wrote Zia , cosè la Resistenza ? ( Auntie , whats the Resistance? ) , a book explaining the Italian Resistance to young people . In 2004 , she wrote a second book for young people , titled Bella ciao : la resistenza raccontata ai ragazzi ( Hey beautiful : the Resistance explained to children ) . In 2006 , she published her memoir together with Anna Vinci , as Storia Di Una Passione Politica ( Story of a Passion for Politics ) . Death . Anselmi died at home in Castelfranco Veneto , Treviso , on 31 October 2016 , aged 89 . Recognition and awards . On 18 June 1998 , Anselmi was awarded the Knights Great Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic . In June 2016 , Anselmi was featured on an Italian postage stamp , the only living person to be honoured in this way . External links . - Tina Anselmi on Radio Radicale
