Wilhelm Liebknecht Wilhelm Martin Philipp Christian Ludwig Liebknecht ( 29 March 1826 – 7 August 1900 ) was a German socialist and one of the principal founders of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ( SPD ) . His political career was a pioneering project combining Marxist revolutionary theory with practical legal political activity . Under his leadership , the SPD grew from a tiny sect to become Germanys largest political party . He was the father of Karl Liebknecht and Theodor Liebknecht . Biography . Early years . Wilhelm Liebknecht was born in 1826 in Giessen , the son of Katharina Elisabeth Henrietta ( née Hirsch ) and Hessian public official Ludwig Christian Liebknecht . Liebknecht grew up with relatives after the death of his parents in 1832 . From 1832 to 1842 , he went to school at the Gymnasium of Giessen , then began studying philology , theology and philosophy in Giessen , Berlin and Marburg . He studied the writings of St Simon , from which he gained his first interest in communism , and had been converted to the extreme republican theories of which Giessen was a centre . After some trouble with the authorities as a result of participating in student radicalism , Liebknecht decided to emigrate to the United States . While on a train to a port city , quite by chance , he met the headmaster of a progressive school in Zurich , Switzerland , and Liebknecht impulsively decided to accept an offer to be an unpaid teacher at that school . Thus he found himself in Switzerland in 1847 as a civil war began in that country . He reported these events for a German newspaper , the Mannheimer Abendzeitung , beginning a career in journalism that he would pursue for the next five decades . Revolution of 1848 . When revolution erupted in Paris in February 1848 , Liebknecht hurried to the scene . He arrived too late to do much in Paris , but he did join a legion that was traveling to Germany to instigate revolution there . During that poorly planned expedition , he was arrested in Baden and charged with treason . On the eve of his trial , revolution erupted once more , and a mob secured his release . He then became a member of the Badische Volkswehr and an adjutant of Gustav von Struve and fought in the ill-fated Reichverfassungskämpfe ( federal constitution wars ) . After the revolutionaries defeat , he escaped to Switzerland and became a leading member of the Genfer Arbeiterverein ( Workers Association of Geneva ) , where he met Friedrich Engels . Years of exile . In 1850 , Liebknecht was arrested for his initiatives to unite Switzerlands German workers associations and was banished from the country . With few options available , like many veterans of the recently failed revolution , he relocated his exile to London , where he stayed from 1850 to 1862 . There he became a member of the Communist League . During these years , he developed a lifelong friendship and collaboration with Karl Marx . In 1862 , after an amnesty for the participants in the revolution of 1848 , he returned to Germany and became a member of Ferdinand Lassalles General German Workers Association ( Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein , ADAV ) , the precursor of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ( SPD ) . Return to Germany . From 1864 to 1865 , Liebknecht also worked for the magazine Der Social-Demokrat ( The Social Democrat ) published by Jean Baptista von Schweitzer . However , he soon found himself in disagreement with the papers friendly position toward Prussia and its new Minister-President Otto von Bismarck . So Liebknecht quit the editorial staff and was forced to leave the ADAV due to pressure from Schweitzer . After being evicted from Berlin by government authorities , Liebknecht moved to Leipzig where he met August Bebel , with whom he founded the Sächsische Volkspartei ( Saxon Peoples Party ) in 1867 and the Social Democratic Workers Party of Germany ( Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands , SDAP ) in 1869 in Eisenach . During these years , he was elected to the national legislature , where he conducted a determined but futile opposition to Bismarcks policies . Liebknecht was also the editor of the party newspaper , Der Volksstaat ( The Peoples State ) . When the Franco-Prussian War began in 1870 , Liebknecht used his newspaper to agitate against the war , calling on working men on both sides of the border to unite in overthrowing the ruling class . As a result , he and Bebel were arrested and charged with treason . It is worth noting that Liebknecht opposed the war regardless of which side started it . His call for revolutionary opposition to the war directly contradicts what his party ( the SPD ) would do in 1914 when World War I began as at that time , with Liebknecht long dead , his successors opted to back the German cause in the war . Treason trial . In 1872 , both Liebknecht and Bebel were convicted and sentenced to two years of ( imprisonment in a fortress ) . This was one of sixteen times that Liebknechts politics resulted in his conviction and incarceration . Return to politics . After being re-elected to the Reichstag in 1874 , Liebknecht played a key role in the merger of the SDAP and Lassalles ADAV into the Socialist Workers Party of Germany ( Sozialistische Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands , SAPD ) in Gotha in 1875 . He also became publisher of the newly founded party organ Vorwärts ( Forward ) , arguing for the integration of Marxist theories into the SAPDs program in his articles . From 1878 to 1890 , the German government outlawed Liebknechts party , but the terms of the law allowed the party to participate in elections and its elected delegates to participate in the Reichstag . Liebknecht used his position as a Reichstag member to criticize the political situation and opposed the tendencies in his own party toward anarchism on the one hand and accommodation with Bismarck on the other . Maintaining a radical and unified stance , the SPD emerged from outlawry in 1890 with 20% of the vote in the Reichstag election . In 1891 , Liebknecht became editor-in-chief of Vorwärts and one of the originators of the SPDs new Marxist-inspired party platform . Throughout that decade , he continued to serve in the Reichstag and to appear at political conventions of the SPD as a prominent referent . Despite his advanced age , he also was a major organizer of the Second Socialist International . Death and legacy . Liebknecht died aged 74 on 7 August 1900 in Charlottenburg , a suburb of Berlin . 50,000 people joined his funeral procession . Works . - Robert Blum und Seine Zeit , Nürnberg , 1896 ( German ) - Ein Blick in die Neue Welt , Stuttgart , 1887 - Die Emscher Depesche oder wie Kriege gemacht werden , Nürnberg , 1895 - Robert Owen : Sein Leben und sozialpolitischen Wirken , Nürnberg , 1892 - Zur Grund- und Bodenfrage , Leipzig , 1876 - Karl Marx : Biographical Memoirs , Chicago , 1906
