Charles Fechter Charles Albert Fechter ( 23 October 1824 – 5 August 1879 ) was an Anglo-French actor . Biography . Fechter was born , probably in London , of French parents , although his mother was of Piedmontese and his father of German extraction . As a boy he had ambitions to be a sculptor but discovered his talent accidentally while appearing in some private theatricals . In 1841 he joined a travelling company that was going to Italy . The tour was a failure , and the company broke up ; Fechter returned home and resumed the study of sculpture . At the same time he attended classes at the Conservatoire with the view of gaining admission to the Comédie-Française . Late in 1844 he won the grand medal of the Académie des Beaux-Arts with a piece of sculpture , and made his debut at the Comédie-Française as Seide in Voltaires Mahomet and Valère in Molières Tartuffe . He acquitted himself with credit ; but , tired of the small parts he found himself condemned to play , returned again to his sculptors studio in 1846 . In the same year he was invited to appear with a French company in Berlin , where he made his first decisive success as an actor . On his return to Paris in the following year he married the actress Eléonore Rabut ( d . 1895 ) . Previously he had appeared for some months in London , in a season of French classical plays given at the St Jamess Theatre . In Paris for the next ten years he fulfilled a series of successful engagements at various theatres , his chief triumph being his creation at the Vaudeville on 2 February 1852 of the part of Armand Duval in La Dame aux camélias . For nearly two years ( 1857–1858 ) Fechter was manager of the Odéon , where he produced Tartuffe and other classical plays . Having received tempting offers to act in English at the Princesss Theatre , London , he made a diligent study of the English language , and appeared there on 27 October 1860 in an English version of Victor Hugos Ruy Blas . This was followed by The Corsican Brothers and Don César de Bazan ; and on 20 March 1861 , he attempted Hamlet for the first time . The result was an extraordinary triumph , the play running for 115 nights . This was followed by Othello , in which he played alternately the Moor and Iago . In 1863 he became lessee of the Lyceum Theatre , which he opened with The Dukes Motto ; this was followed by The Kings Butterfly , The Mountebank ( in which his son Paul , a boy of seven , appeared ) , The Roadside Inn , The Master of Ravenswood , The Corsican Brothers ( in the original French version , in which he had created the parts of Louis and Fabian dei Franchi ) and The Lady of Lyons . After this he appeared at the Adelphi Theatre ( 1868 ) as Obenreizer in No Thoroughfare , by Charles Dickens and Wilkie Collins , as Edmond Dantes in The Count of Monte Cristo , and as Count de Leyrac in Black and White , a play in which the actor himself collaborated with Wilkie Collins . In 1870 he visited the United States , where ( with the exception of a visit to London in 1872 ) he remained till his death . He played in the United States between 1870 and 1876 in most of the parts in which he had won his chief triumphs in Britain . His first appearance in New York was at Niblos Garden in the title role of Hugos Ruy Blas in January 1870 . He leased the Globe Theatre at 730 Broadway in September 1870 . The experiment was brief . Fechters imperious temper , aggravated by indulgence in drink , involved him in private quarrels and in discussions in the press , and he left in January 1871 . He then had the same experiences at the old French theatre , renamed the Lyceum Theatre that year , and also in Boston . He then went into a brief partnership with William Stuart at the newly completed New Park Theatre in April 1874 . It had been built by Stuart and Dion Boucicault , who pulled out just before the opening . Fechter acted in his own Loves Penance , an adaptation of Le médecin des enfants by le Comte dAvrigny . However the play flopped , and Fechter retired to a farm which he had bought at the little village of Rockland Township , Berks County , Pennsylvania , near Quakertown . The last three years of his life were spent in seclusion with his second wife , Lizzie Price , and his dogs on the farm , where he died . He was interred at Mount Vernon Cemetery in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . A bust of the actor by himself is in the Garrick Club , London . Family life . He married , 29 November 1847 , Mlle Charlotte Eléonore Rabut ( 1819-1894 ) , a pensionnaire of the Comédie Française , Paris , by whom he had a son , Paul , and a daughter , Marie , who became an operatic singer . From 1850 to April 1855 , he had a love affair with the famous actress Pauline Virginie Déjazet ( 1798-1875 ) . References . Notes Sources
